We started trips abroad for all majors, majors or any others in our classes that wanted to go.
And we had very good luck.
Should I start from scratch?
Start over?
No, that's all right.
It probably picked it up.
And we had very good luck with some of our full associate professors taking the group.
And at that time, we had our base in for the French group in La Rochelle, which is way off near Bordeaux.
And it's a fascinating section of the country.
It's not something that students normally would see, or even we would see.
Anyway, here came this one year.
Nobody was able to take the group, none of the experienced people.
We had an arrangement with the Language Institute there.
Students studied language in the morning and did cultural things in the afternoon, and I felt that it was very important.
for the A&M representative, faculty member, to be very much involved in that and be sure that they didn't just turn them over to a museum guide or something, you know.
So anyway, we tried to get the best people we could, and we were always lucky.
Then one year, we couldn't, and I had a volunteer
after I twisted her arm, and that was Gretchen Schmidt, you know, Hank Schmidt's wife.
But Gretchen is a very timid soul, and she was really petrified.
She wouldn't do it, but she was so afraid.
I said, well, don't worry.
I decided I was going to Europe anyway.
I decided I would go with her.
They always took a tour, a short three, four-day, five-day tour on a bus.
I would do the tour with her and get them all settled in La Rochelle, and from there on out she could handle it.
She was reassured, and that was fine.
Well, I'm glad I went because we had a couple of funny students.
There was one who had just gotten married, a man, a guy, and I think he missed his wife.
He wished he were home.
But instead, he picked on everything.
He was negative, negative, negative.
One day, I almost blew my top because I put up with a lot from this young man.
We had bought picnic provisions, you know, good French bread and cheese, a bottle of wine, what have you.
And he opened the cheese and he sniffed it, and he said, yuck, this thing.
Threw it out the window of the bus.
I had a little talk with him and told him that, number one, I wanted him to learn about French cheese.
That's what the smell.
And number two, that that is unacceptable behavior.
And if he wanted to act like an ass, I was going to put him on the next fight home.
But I thought the reaction of the other students was, look at their faces, and they didn't quite know what was going on.
What's wrong with the cheese?
But Gretchen said once they got there and got the class and all, he settled down too.
Now, when did those European trips begin, as far as you know?
In the 70s?
70s.
And did they become a requirement for a language major?
No.
We couldn't make it a requirement because we didn't have any funding to help out.
There were some students who couldn't afford it, and some of them already had so many student loans they couldn't get any.
We did arrange for those who wanted to.
to get student loans, because many did.
All right, then the faculty members' expenses, were they paid by you?
They were paid.
All right, but then the students paid their own?
They were paid for, except when I went, for instance, it wasn't paid for, because we paid Gretchen.
And I really just went along.
I knew I was going to have a good time anyway, and I was going anyway, and it worked out fine.
But we've always tried to,
charge as little as we could get away with.
But it's still quite a lot of money on top of everything else.
And we have, and I think they still do now, trips to almost every place.
We have trips to France, to Germany, to Russia.
Italy.
Cook, that's the name of the Russian instructors, man and wife.
Olga Cook.
C-O-O-K?
Oh, okay.
She's very nice.
And anyway, they have taken them, I don't know how many times.
And so we do this now every summer pretty regularly.
Did the department have anything to do with A&M acquiring that center in Italy near Florence?
No, we didn't really have an input on that.
All right.
How did that come about, do you know?
That came, well, in a way, I mean, I was involved to some extent.
Somebody, and I'm not sure who that was, thought it would be good if we had a sort of base somewhere in Europe.
Might have been David Maxwell, I don't know whose idea it was.
And one of my
annual Treks to Europe, he asked me if I would go to the Strasbourg area and look at one particular place somebody had told him about.
And so apparently there were several of us working on it without knowing what was going on.
And I came back saying that was not a good place.
Don't pick that one.
And the reason for that was linguistic, because Strasbourg, as you know, historically, at the language they speak today, the older people still speak with an Alamanic dialect.
And the French dialect is even worse.
That's not a good place for students to learn French.
So then we did get involved individually.
But not with, for our own trips, but not with the one in Italy.
Carolyn Adair has a lot to do with that.
And I don't know, we never really, I get along with Jimmy while with Carolyn, we like each other, but we've never had any kind of connections in this.
In any of those summer institute classes,
Did you as a department head ever have to unravel any big snafu?
Did anything come up?
You know Claudine Hunting?
Hunting, Claudine.
I don't believe so.
Turned it off.
I had to testify about some of those things.
I didn't like that one bit.
What were some of the high points of your department head years?
some of the points that you remember most proudly, enjoyably?
I enjoyed every minute of it.
But it wasn't all fun.
There were a lot of headaches and a lot of problems.
Describe the major task of being the department head.
Tasks?
What did you have to spend most of your time doing?
Well, believe it or not, I spent most of my time counseling students, talking to students, whatever.
I just seemed to have had a steady stream of them coming in all the time.
And the only time I didn't was when I told my secretary, I'm going to have to work on the budget.
I closed my door.
Don't let anybody in.
But there were students who complained about their instructors, students who wanted to know what they might do with a language major.
I don't know.
I got along well enough with students that they came to me, so I was pretty proud of that.
Normally your work day was, what?
You were on the campus normally?
Well, I was brought up by Jack Nats, who sort of figured that we were eight to five people.
And by the time I took over as department head, I had long since realized that most faculty don't work from eight to five.
Oh, I was usually in the office by 8.30 every day.
And that stayed until my work got done.
It might be 6 o'clock, it might be 3.30.
How much time did you have to spend working with faculty?
Actually, not all that much.
This was a very, very basically capable faculty.
The ones we hired,
after me, were just totally professional.
We had to let some of those non-professional part-timers go.
That was a hard thing for me to do.
Jack had hired them.
And then when I came in, first thing I had to do, we had, I think, four part-time women.
Two were very good, two were hopeless.
And in order to seem at least fair, I had to fire all four of them and simply say, we're abolishing this position.
But I rehired two of them within a year.
And they knew they would be rehired.
I told them I wanted them back.
But there was just no other good way of singling them out.
And that was very painful because they were nice ladies.
They were just not competent.
And most of the people that you all began to hire then were Ph.D.?
Ph.D.
or ABD.
And were there any particular programs that you looked at with preference when you hired?
Oh, yeah.
Where?
Well, by then I had, I worked with committees.
When I came on tour there was another committee around.
There's always a little idiosyncratic preference.
This is my old school or something, you know.
But basically, the better universities.
But we always had problems with the really tough ones.
We interviewed a man from Harvard who turned us down.
Generally speaking, the Ivy League doesn't fit into Texas very well, I think, because we've got a couple of them, but they left rather quickly, too.
Did you find that A&M's reputation was a plus or a minus in recruitment?
At that time, it didn't have a reputation, period, which was sort of a minus in a way.
But people just didn't know much about it.
Right.
I think, excuse me, some of them came.
Don't forget your lapel.
Most of the people you recruited were at the assistant professor?
Yes.
Now, Wolf Kupke came... He came as full professor.
And how did that...
He came as a full professor along with those other two gentlemen from Rice.
And the department was so terrible at the time of the German section.
It was probably the poorest we had on the point of view of faculty.
So this was to build it up?
It was to build it up.
And Bryson Camp was still with us.
He retired shortly after that.
Now, as you all were recruiting, did you feel that
administration gave you about as much salary to offer as they could?
At times, yes.
At times, no.
Oh, okay.
There was some on either side.
And I presume that there was never any problem about whether you hired a man or a woman or an Anglo or anyone else?
That never entered into the picture at all.
As a matter of fact, we tried to get as many minorities as we could, which was possible with Spanish, but not with other languages.
And there was no problem hiring women.
No problem hiring women.
By that time, they were everywhere all of a sudden.
And yeah, I remember
We were really after a candidate for French, a French position, a lady, a black lady.
We were very much impressed by her.
She came for an interview, and everybody wanted her for a variety of reasons, all of them good.
But the lady turned us down, saying, this is interesting, not because of Texas, not because she felt any racial problems might arise, because she said she's basically a teacher, not a researcher.
She doesn't want to be under the pressure of having to publish in order to get tenure.
So there.
And altogether, you know, as department head,
I'd get, of course, the Chronicle of Higher Education, a number of other publications.
And if you looked at those figures, there were maybe three or four PhDs a year among some of the minorities, even less.
But you know if you have two PhDs and two black PhDs, the whole country is going after them.
Surely, surely.
And that was always a problem.
I really think it still is a problem.
But we tried, I tried particularly, to get a sort of diversified faculty.
I told my department in the deliberations to bear in mind sort of
not overloading either the male, female, or white, black, Hispanic, whatever.
We were lucky with the Spanish because I don't know if that's still true or not.
I always thought it was ridiculous, but the federal government
recognizes Latinos from South America or what have you, or from Spain, the way they would Mexican-American.
As long as we had somebody with a Spanish surname, fine.
And we got some wonderful people out of various countries.
Well Luis Costa was one of them.
You can't be any
any more white and what have you than Luis, but he was classified as Hispanic and just made us look good.
And so did another lady from Uruguay, and we had several of those.
We actually attracted only about one or two Mexican Americans, and one of them, still at A&M,
He is now the director of international programs.
They gave him, they moved him over there.
But he's a Mexican-American from the border area, and he has a Ph.D.
from the University of Michigan.
We always wished we could get more of those people, but it was difficult.
Right.
Am I correct?
You felt that the administration supported and encouraged your department's efforts to... At that time, yes, very much so.
There seemed to be a constant stream of communication.
And as the years went on, more women began to enroll in the courses.
Yes.
And did that change the way the department operated at all?
It...
It gave us better students, frankly.
Better students.
It made us, it enabled many of us, I think, to do a better job in the classroom, because the student's response was different.
Do you think that in your classes, in your last years, it was more difficult for a student, a student had to work harder to make an A than they had when you first got here?
Possibly.
I hadn't really thought about that.
Possible.
I think I did in mine without deliberately doing so.
Exactly.
I think it just comes with the territory.
If the students are better, well, you demand more of them.
Or I guess I should say, in your last years, were the students better prepared when they walked in the first day?
Yes and no.
Some were, some were.
And in your later years, what percentage, what, did, there was still the big demand for service courses?
Right.
And the doctoral?
Doctoral folded.
Okay.
Completely.
Oh, because the department?
They gave up the requirements.
Okay.
And so?
Which was actually,
useful at the time because it freed the faculty members to teach the additional sections of the undergraduate program.
All right.
By the time you retired, a student could major at the undergraduate level in what languages?
French, Spanish, German, and Russian.
Not Italian.
They may have Italian now.
And not any Asian language?
No major in it.
Then you offered service courses in what other languages?
Almost any of our languages served.
If they wanted to take two years of Chinese, they could do that.
Still any Czech?
We haven't had any Czech in a long time.
Greek?
Only one year, I think.
But you know the requirements always say two years of the same language.
And no Latin?
Latin never did make, we teach Latin.
But we never got a major out of it.
And during all the years that you taught here, were there any shifts in popularity of any of the languages?
Spanish was always
Always number one.
Number one.
And I can understand that because it's something that they can see the practicality of it locally.
Let's see.
And there were undergraduate majors in these languages, and then describe the process of getting that master's degree approved.
in Spanish.
I didn't have too much to do with it.
I turned it over to Chester Christian, who was our senior Spanish professor.
Chester is a wonderful, lovable person, but he's also, he has an idiosyncratic way of doing things.
He wrote the original proposal, and a lot of us, when we read it, we added, took out, and so on.
It took us a good while.
It took us three years, I think, to get it approved.
But after that, I doubt that they're more than about, I don't know about today.
I can't really speak for today.
But when I retired in the late 80s,
We never had more than maybe five or five graduate Spanish students in any one year.
So that would be two or three master's degrees per year?
Yep, right.
And they were normal, most ordinarily, what was their background?
What were they?
Were they Anglo or were they Hispanic?
They were Anglos.
And what were they planning to do, be teachers?
Some planned being on teaching.
Some planned, I think several of them that I knew wanted to go into international business.
Were they Aggie undergraduates?
Yeah.
I don't think that we ever got a graduate student for a Spanish program who had not been an undergraduate at A&M.
While you were department head, to whom did you turn outside the department for any advice or counsel?
Usually, somebody in the dean's office.
And who would that be?
Well, early on it was Henry Pope, and later it was Danny Parker.
Both of those gentlemen had just been a
Really a great effort for me.
Tremendous help.
Let's see.
Who succeeded Dave Maxwell as dean?
Jones?
I don't know.
See, I was gone by then.
I think I was gone, too.
I don't know where.
Oh, no.
What?
No, no, no.
That was Keith Bryan.
Keith, yes.
Okay, yeah.
All right.
And did he continue to be supportive as Dr. Maxwell?
No.
He was not as supportive as Dean Maxwell was.
He was the opposite of supportive.
Were there any gifts to the program?
Did anybody give any money?
Any outsider given?
Outsider?
For some projects, strangely enough, they did.
One of them was this Czech foundation.
They were on my back the whole time I was department head to resume teaching Czech.
Well, one year I gave in and tried it, and no students showed up.
So I told all the rest of them, all those people who kept, they think that I was, you know,
keeping it out on purpose that I didn't like it or something or other.
But I said, look, there's no students.
What can I do?
But they give a lot to this foundation and they take trips to the Czech Republic occasionally and use the money.
But no, I wouldn't say that
We would have liked an endowment of some kind, but I understand from, at the time at least, talking to other department heads that that was very difficult for the department to do anyway.
Did any person outside the department ever try to twist your arm to do something?
Oh, some parents.
Give some examples, please.
Oh, you know, some dissatisfied parents.
A couple of times they'd come in and want to find out why their son had made or whatever great.
And about all I could say, and I was kind of glad of that, was, I can't discuss this with you unless he gives me permission to.
What was their reaction to that?
But he's our son.
We're paying his bills.
Papa was really angry.
But I said, well, I'm sorry, but that's the law.
And they never brought Junior in there then to... No!
I told them, I said, if y'all wanted to have a conference, the two of you and your son and me, I'd be very happy to have one.
They never came by.
Did any administrator or board member or former student ever... A, believe it or not, a former...
track coach, I think.
Track or baseball.
Anyway, he came to tell me that I was being unfair to two of his students, and after all they were athletes and scholarships, and they were the mainstay of his team or whatever, and please give him a better grade.
What was your response?
I laughed.
I said, you know, I think that's kind of funny.
You shouldn't be doing this.
And he said, well, you've got to get these guys, talk to your guys, get them to do their work.
And that was that.
There was always a lot of that sort of thing going on, one thing after another, never really very earth-shaking.
No politician.
No.
No legislator.
Not once.
And no board member, no regent.
No.
Were y'all, did you ever get any advice on what courses to add or to take away?
What courses to offer?
Only internally, if whoever dean was in there.
felt that we didn't have enough enrollment or something like that.
The question would come up, maybe you should do away with this, but not very often.
Not from the outside.
All right, as the department made progress, other than you, who else in the department deserved most of the credit for the progress the department made?
I would say that Wolf Kupke,
Just a Christian.
Probably deserved most of the credit.
They were very good with the junior faculty.
Wolf, particularly, would come into my office frequently with an idea.
We would just kick the idea around, see what we could make of it.
And frequently something came of it.
And the department made its major decisions as the whole department met, or was there a kind of an executive committee?
No, we didn't have an executive committee, but we had a group committee, you might say.
We had a committee for French.
Oh, for each of the sections.
Another one for each separate language.
Am I correct that you all used the word section?
Yes.
French section.
Right.
So that, you know, this...
would help in